Hey, Sheena.
Hey, how's it going?
It's going really well. Looking forward to doing a show together.
Thanks for everyone who's here on the live stream or watching that later.
And with that, Sheena, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thanks so much. Happy to be here.
Yeah, I'm happy to have you here.
We've got an awesome topic queued up.
One that I just, I don't know if I'll ever get tired of coming back to this
because I'm just such a fan of simplicity and getting stuff done and not like,
let's see how many layers of things we can pile on.
And by that, I mean, HTMX as a success story
for going from a whole bunch of front end stuff,
a bunch of different multiple apps, you know, JavaScript front end,
Django back end talking to each other, but kind of being separate as well.
And just switching to HTMX.
You wrote up a really cool essay on this that we're going to dive into and share your experience.
Yeah, it was a pretty fantastic experience overall.
I was really surprised by HTMX when I came across it the first time because there are so many fashionable front-end libraries and frameworks.
So when I heard about it, I was like, oh, it's another one of those, whatever.
And then I went to a DjangoCon, I think it was 2022, and I saw a talk from Chris May, who's in the audience, and that got me excited about it.
And yeah, that's kind of when my whole story started.
So yeah, so what I had been doing before was working with, so I had this team and we were building a thing and we had a React front end.
So on the front, and that's a normal thing.
Like if you wanted like a modern front-end application,
you'd use something like React or Vue or one of the many competitors.
And then on the back end, we had Django.
And I think that's like a fairly normal, fairly accepted way to do things,
or it has been for a long time.
But I think it's like, I think it's a little faulty.
I think that front-end web development has been in a little bit of a complexity
death spiral for the last little while.
And sometimes it's useful, sometimes it's really helpful,
but for some things you need certain tools
in the front end, I think.
But yeah, I think things have been going
in the complexity direction for a long time
and HTML solves a lot of problems.
All right, well, you think back to the jQuery days.
How did you use jQuery?
You included a CDN or if you're wild, you might download it and include it in your own static content.
And then you started using it, right?
And just layers and layers have just been building.
And JavaScript of 2024 era looks nothing like 10 years ago, 15 years ago, JavaScript.
I would say it's one of the more complicated programming environments, you know, compared to something like C++, right?
because there's so many steps in there,
so many implicit linkings and stuff.
Yeah, there's a lot of dark magic under the hood.
It's very hard to know what's going on.
And I think one of the challenges is that a lot of people
used to get into web dev as their gateway drug to programming.
Like they'd start off with web dev
and then branch out from there.
But now web dev is like this magic weird box
with so many layers.
And I think it's sort of messed a lot of people up.
it's a challenge to get started in the way that people used to get started.
And it's like the barrier to entry level programmers used to need to be here.
And now it's here.
And yeah, there's a lot of tricky things to the ecosystem as a whole.
But yeah, like all the bold steps, all the magic things that happen under the hood.
And the fact that you have to like tasks switch between completely different
applications and completely different like ways of thinking.
Like, so for me, I've always loved Django.
It's so good.
So with the thing that I was building,
I went to Django because I needed to build the thing really, really fast.
And so my efficiency was important.
And then it was like, I need a good front end.
And React was a clear choice at the time.
But it means like switching, like for me to work on this thing,
I need to keep holding the Django application
and the React application in my head and how they talk.
And it's not just React.
It's like Redux and Saga and side effects and asynchronous goodies.
And then on the Django side, it's all of that.
And Django is, I think, much simpler to get your head around than React, actually.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a tricky thing.
Yeah, it definitely is a tricky thing.
And one thing I would just like to put out early before we get too much mail is this is not necessarily a hate on JavaScript sort of thing.
There are people in the node space that are super fans of HTMX.
And I think what is not obvious about the benefits of HTMX, as we get into it, we'll talk about some of these things.
But you were just touching on that.
You've got this React front end.
It has its own state.
It also has its own capability.
So it's running on the client side, so it can't talk to file systems or the database.
It can only talk to APIs.
On the other hand, you've got the Django app, which probably is not talking to APIs, but talks to the database, talks to the server levels things.
And you've got to, as you're working on this app, think, OK, I'm in this context.
That means no database.
I'm in this context.
That means primarily just database.
And it's just you have these two worlds.
And if you could say, could I just write in one of them?
In the JavaScript, people might even pick like, I just want to stay in JavaScript, but always node.
or always at least pick one of the styles of programming
and not just constantly switch back and forth
between these, you have browser capabilities,
you have server capabilities, you have browser information.
Like just, that is just not productive.
It's not the best, right?
And so as much as you can avoid that,
and as we'll see, HTMX is super easy
about keeping it in one place, right?
So I think that's one of the big things
that people should be honing in on as we talk about this?
What do you think?
- Oh yeah, definitely.
Yeah, if I came across as hating on JavaScript,
I dig JavaScript and I use it a lot where it's needed.
I think it is a fantastic tool in the toolbox
that I'm on sides with you,
that it's just the complexity of switching contexts
all the time, it slows you down
and it's a lot to keep in your head.
And so it's like, for me,
when I was working on this application
and needing to switch contexts all the time.
It's like, you can't just make a thing.
Like you have to like do the dance to make the thing.
And it's like-
- Set up four different chained file watchers
to do their things and stuff, right?
- So it just like adds a little bit of a,
like you're slower than you would like to be.
There's like more tedium than there should be.
It would be nice if you could just like
build the thing quickly in a simple way
and it just works and is beautiful.
And HTMX kind of allows that along with other tools.
Yeah, so for me, that context switching
was like a painful, painful thing.
And for the team I was working with as well,
I had a bunch of juniors on my team.
And it was so hard to get them productive because it was like,
OK, do you want to be productive on the back end?
Or do you want to be productive on the front end?
And then on the front end, that was complicated because of the,
again, React, Redux, Redux saga.
So they were all just like suffering.
- And to put real features into place,
you've gotta do a vertical slice, right?
Which hits most, if not all, you know,
you probably have to touch the React front end.
- Yeah.
- You probably need some new tiny bits of UI designs,
you know, CSS and maybe some SAS build stuff there.
And you know, like then you're doing the server side bits
and then you're doing a database migration
And it's just like it's end to end, right?
Yeah.
And for some people, it's not even reasonable to expect them to have all of those skills, those end to end skills.
And then it's like you have to make your team complicated.
You have to have a back end team and a front end team.
And they need to now integrate with each other.
And so it resembles the team stack.
Yeah, that's interesting.
Yeah, we have a group for this later, a group for that later.
And, you know, look, if you're a huge company, maybe that actually makes tons of sense.
Maybe.
I'm not saying it does, but it may.
But when you were a small company, it just doesn't, right?
No, no.
And yeah, like I think when you're building something,
you do need to think about the team that's going to be building it.
Their skills right now, the skills that they're going to have in the future,
the skills that you're going to need to pull into the team in the future.
And so it's, I don't know if it makes sense to, well, in my context,
it didn't make sense to split up the team.
If I had the tools to allow everybody
to be in the same place from the beginning,
that would have been freaking fantastic.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
That would be awesome.
So let's talk about,
let's talk a bit about HTML.
So we said, hey, we've been talking about this
in sort of broad terms,
but let's be a little bit specific
and maybe you could tell us,
What is this HTMX and why is it not just a different flavor of
reactor view or something?
Then maybe we could talk through a few examples.
Okay, cool. The way I explain HTMX to myself is that,
imagine looking at HTML.
HTML is with us, it's going to be with us forever,
maybe not forever, but for a very long time.
What if we like?
many attempts to replace it and they were all bad. Yeah. Yeah. So it's probably going to stick
around for the foreseeable future and it's everywhere. And what if we could just augment
it slightly so that it could do what we needed it to do in the modern web? Like since HTML got
invented, like it's quite a simple tool, but now we need to do all this extra stuff because people
expect all sorts of interactivity in the user interfaces. They expect asynchronous workloads
and things like that. And what if HTML could do that? And it can do that. And it's not actually
that hard to make it do that. You just need to add a few extra attributes. And so what HTMX is,
is a really, really small JavaScript library. And you just include it as a script tag in your page,
and then it's there and it's available and it's installed just like the old, the good old days
of jQuery. Yeah, you could just go back and throw it in a CD if you wanted, couldn't you?
That's right. I hadn't really thought about it. And then from there, you just have these extra
attributes on your HTML tags that do different things. So for example, like, so HTML has a lot
of different stuff, but if you were to like 80, 20 years and look at the parts that are the most
used, then basically the stuff you'll use the most
are like tying into events, like click event handlers
or whatnot.
And then when you click on the thing or whatever,
it'll send a request to a back end.
And the back end responds with an HTML fragment.
And then you swap that fragment into your page somewhere.
So if you were to look at the HTMX documentation,
the hello world of HTMX is a button.
And the button says, has the attributes HX post clicked.
So it's saying, when you click on the button,
then send a post request to a URL that's like forward slash clicked.
So you can decide what HTTP method you're using,
and where it's going, and what event you're tying into.
And then when the response arrives, then you do something with it.
And the response is HTML.
It's not a JSON response that you then need to turn into HTML.
It's plain old normal HTML.
So it's super simple to write.
And then you take that HTML and you put it somewhere on the page.
So maybe you swap the current button
that you just clicked with the HTML that was returned.
Or maybe you take it and you put it at the end of another element.
You can append stuff, you can pre-pend stuff,
you can replace entire elements,
you can replace the internals of elements.
And that little pattern is actually really, really powerful.
So, and you can tie into all sorts of different events.
So there's like interacting with individual elements
like a click or a form submission.
You can say like on load or like on scroll
or all sorts of different things.
So events, yeah.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So one of the motivations that Carl, Carson Gross puts there is why should a
and forum only be able to make HTTP requests?
Why should you only be able to click and have click and submit events,
trigger them, right.
And all these things, you know, so it's kind of like just extending some of
these niche features.
Like you can click a button, but not an image in HTML to, to all the pieces.
And then like you said, exchanging fragments of HTML, right?
Like just instead of sending JSON back
and then having the client side turn that into HTML,
just do it on the server and stick it where it goes, right?
Basically that's it.
- Yeah, so it's dead simple to code as well,
which is fantastic.
So it's a simple,
you're just server side rendering some HTML
like we used to a long time ago.
So it feels very familiar to people
who got into web dev a long time ago.
And the code itself is very, very easy to write.
Like initially you might like scratch your head,
unfamiliar, but give yourself a couple of hours
and it'll start to feel familiar.
It's, yeah, it's lovely to work in.
- Yeah, I would also encourage people
that want to get started with this and play with this.
The examples that they have on the website
are pretty comprehensive, right?
If you scroll through, I don't know how many there are,
maybe 20 or so.
Yeah, more than that.
Yeah, perhaps.
Yeah, there's a lot of them here.
So if you go into each one of them,
it'll show you basically some interesting things.
So if you go to the first one, the click to edit,
it says here's a bit of static HTML, like a label and a div,
and then a button that says click to edit.
And all it has is HX get, and it says edit this thing, right?
And when you go and click it, there's a little example at the bottom.
You click it.
That's all fun.
But if you open up the bottom, there's
like a little history of interactions.
And like-- I don't know what you call it--
but like a web history that shows what's transferred.
So when you click Edit, here's what the response was.
And it shows the HTML fragment, which in itself
has a new HX, has HX events.
And then when it saves it,
it goes back to the static and so on.
And I think it's a really pretty easy way
to get a sense of what it is.
What do you think?
- Yeah, I think so.
I think so.
Those examples are great.
I think like one thing that I like to do is use HTMX
and the thing called Alpine JS together.
Yeah, so for me, HTMX is great for when the data needs to be passed back and forth, but
like for something like this, I'd probably use something like Alpine just to say like
show and hide the form.
Yeah, it's also fantastic.
So you don't like strictly need it, I suppose, but it does save on like some back and forth
and it does make things a little bit more like in one place, a little bit more like locality
of behaviors. So now we're looking at the Alpine JS, and this is cool because it also it's like
HTMX in that it just adds a couple of extra attributes to your HTML tags. And the 80/20 of
this is that you can define variables and those variables are like a state and they are defined
within the scope of the place where you defined it. So if you have like div x data equals open
false as a JSON object, then within the scope of this div, we have this thing called open,
and its initial value is false. And then you can do things like click on a button to change open
to true or to toggle open. So you can have it like show form true or false. And then you can say,
then you can say, here it says span extra equals open.
So we only show that under certain circumstances.
And you can also have not open, or you can have
like it speaks JavaScript.
So you can do some interesting things in there as well.
Yeah, this is pretty interesting.
This is something I have not really used.
But I do hear Alpine and HTMX mentioned together frequently.
They do have a similar vibe.
Yeah, they do.
They do.
Yeah, I've enjoyed it a lot.
I tend to just use it for small, simple things,
but those small, simple things add up.
So for example, if you have menus that open and close
and things like that, you might want
to use something like this.
Yeah.
Or event handling.
Like if you click this button, change the state to this,
and then it triggers the binding to open and close sections
and so on.
Yeah.
OK.
Interesting.
Yeah.
You know, one example that I can give from over that stuff
that I'm working on is I'm definitely using HTMX over
at Talk Python Training, right, with our courses.
And I added this little tag cloud.
It's not quite a cloud, but a bunch of different things
you can explore.
So when you load this page, actually,
one of the things that's really challenging
is it has the price in your local currency.
So it figures out where is your IP, where do you live.
And that currency, the prices of those things,
outside of the US change a lot.
Sometimes it can be really slow to figure out
what the price of every course is, if there's sales,
and you're in this country, and that applies in this way.
So all these little prices are all calculated with HTMX.
So it loads normally without the prices.
Then probably by the time you get to it,
the prices are already there automatically.
And then as you click around, you get--
this is all-- as you click these little tags up here,
you can even click on the HTMX tag
and see you have three HTMX courses, right?
With last Django and one that just kind of uses it.
But all of this stuff, there's no JavaScript on this page,
at least not doing any of it.
It's all just HTMX, right?
Yeah, that's great.
Beautifully good.
It's so good.
Yeah, I've certainly enjoyed working with it.
But let's talk a bit about your writer.
Like, let's talk about, spend the rest of time
on your story, how you started using HTMX.
you've given us some of the sense but let's talk about the app that you were building right
you had this team of fairly junior developers what's the story um at the time i was working for
a non-profit training provider in south africa and um we used to have everybody on premises
in this place called jeffies town which is really a dodgy place and it was great it was it was a lot
of fun. But then COVID happened. And so we had to figure out how to support everybody remotely.
And so it built an LMS. So initially, we like looked around that LMS means learner management
system. We had a whole lot of learners we had, I think there were about 150 at the time. And we
needed to figure out like how to support them from home, we couldn't just be like come back next year
because the like, partially, we couldn't let them down partially the funding model wouldn't work and
all sorts of things yeah it was an insane time i it's it's kind of normalized in our history because
it's we've moved past it but yeah we gotta remember that's an ins that was a disturbing time yeah yeah
like so many people have horror stories from from then i was like this was hard it was like super
super stressful um but in the end we ended up with this cool thing um so yeah so like a lot of lmss
exist, you can get one off the shelf. And they're a lot like very clever textbooks that track learners
over time. But for us, we're training, we are training software developers. And so we wanted
something more than a textbook. We wanted to train professionals. And so we ended up building this
thing from the learner's perspective. It was a Kanban board, and then they could move cards around
on the board to do different things. They could like start a project and then we'd create a repo
for them and make um add them as a collaborator and protect the main branch and all of that good
stuff and then we could get them to review each other and we could track all that and display it
in the front right try to teach them get and GitHub and prs and all that yeah yeah it was so cool
like by the time they got to work um like they're always very nervous getting into their first job
and then they'd say like this is familiar like we know how this works i'm teaching people stuff here
actually that's weird yeah yeah exactly that's cool yeah so built this thing out and managed to
keep training the people and it worked and then it was like okay this thing is pretty rough around
the edges because we built it um in self-defense and like oh you should i hope this works um
so we needed to to build more on it and we were hiring a lot of junior developers because we were
like very, very beginner stuff. So if you want to teach a person what a return statement is,
or what a loop is, or anything like that, then you do not need a senior developer or like a senior
lecturer. You need somebody who understands what a loop is and what a return statement is. So we had
all these juniors running around, like helping out, and they needed to build stuff with their own
growth as well, and their own, like if they do not build stuff, then they will, and it is sad.
So, yeah, so we're trying to get them productive on the stack, but it was very, very difficult.
So for me, I'd been working on React applications and I've been working on Django.
And so for me, it was fine.
I could just like, like, I could keep the whole thing in my head.
But yeah, it was just, it was just really tough for them.
So I think there is a little bit of an art to making a junior developer productive,
but like, I just was not figuring it out.
So I tried this for a while and then one day went to a DjangoCon US and I saw Chris May's talk that
spoke about HTMX and I was just like, maybe this is worth a try. So I was like, okay, I'm just going
to proof of concept it and see if I can build the weirdest parts of our application in HTMX.
Yeah. That's awesome. Yeah. Because I guess the question is, if you're asking,
will it work you're like this is the most crazy interactive bit and if it can do this the other
stuff is easy like switching from logged in to just log out or whatever it's like yeah okay that's
that's nothing right yeah yeah yeah so um most of our functionality was around this kanban board so
it's like all right let me just make some cards and make some columns and and see if i can shift
stuff around and um it all worked out really well and wasn't it wasn't super hard like i think one
One of the challenges with HTMX is that it's very easy to build spaghetti templates because
you have the main template and all these partials and then all these URLs that are pointing to
the partial. So it is possible to get yourself in a bit of a tangle there. So you need to
arrange things nicely. But yeah, the process was so smooth that I was like, let me try this.
So our application was this Django app on the back, exposing a bunch of APIs with Django REST
framework. And so the idea was to just instead of like we'd leave the React app as is and would
keep on working. Meanwhile, we'd just build out some like perfectly normal Django views to do the
HTML stuff. And then we could move everybody over to the new application. So the new front end was
part of the original Django app. So we didn't rebuild absolutely everything. We just rebuilt that
part um and generally speaking if somebody suggests rebuilding a thing i worry like usually it's a bad
idea usually it's like yeah or something yes i've had to stop myself many times do you know that david
not Beasley, Beattie.
If you look for, there's a great song.
It says, we're going to do the big rewrite on YouTube.
Let's see.
Yeah, there we go.
This is so good.
So I think it's got some ad.
Dylan Beattie it is.
Yeah, I'll put a link in here.
He's got some amazing parodies.
one's it's a six and a half minute parody of american pie we're gonna do the big rewrite
and it's it's glorious so i'll link it but you should be afraid right this is something that like
we're gonna rewrite it and basically the song is here's the eight version the eight different
languages this thing's previously been written in you know yeah it's with something's working
sometimes even if it's not perfect yeah and it was also like rewriting it in order to optimize
for this team that was mostly juniors. And so I was like, is this me being crazy? Like,
there was a lot of, yeah, I was very unsure. But then, so I tried everything out, and it worked,
and it was fun, and it was, like, straightforward to write for this, like, small thing. And then I
was like, let me see how the team works on this. So I gave them a bunch of little tasks to do. I was
like implement this, try that, da, da, da.
And everybody was productive.
So I felt like-
- How did they receive it when you introduced this idea
to them after they'd been living in React
and Redux and all these things?
- I think for them, they were happy with it.
I think at first a little bit skeptical,
but then once they started going,
like I did get feedback from them.
I make a point of getting feedback from them.
And they were like, this HTMX thing is way better.
So that's great.
Wait, what's the trick?
Why does this work?
Yeah, yeah.
So they went with it, and then they succeeded,
and they were happy and productive, which is great.
And even people who needed way too much of my support,
people who I had to really sit with and pair with just to do anything,
they were suddenly able to do stuff that was meaningful.
So I think for me, that's one of the things that's so exciting about HTMX.
like been working and training for so long and I've been like fighting the fight of like
getting junior developers job ready for so long that like I'm aware of many problems in
the tech education ecosystem and the junior hiring ecosystem and like the fact that entry
level positions are like too hard for people like it's a problem.
And now we have tools that make web developments approachable again.
So I'm singing this HTMX song because I think it's going to change the industry in some pretty big ways.
I think it's already making waves, but I'd like them to happen faster and bigger.
Yeah.
I think it will as well.
And, you know, I think the current web frameworks are really good and work really well with it.
But I wonder if, I wouldn't be surprised to see
kind of like FastAPI came along and just said,
Pydantic is the essence of this thing.
And Pydantic changed a lot of data exchange,
a lot of data validation.
I'd wonder if some framework comes along
and just says, HTMX is just ground up part of this thing.
All right, that'd be interesting to see what that looks like.
- It would be interesting.
I think there are definitely useful patterns
and how to do different things.
People are building tools around it or tools that complements it in useful ways.
So we spoke about AlpineJS.
There's another thing called template partials from the other Carlton, Carlton Gibson.
And that's really, really great.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
Something like this is super needed to make the code go from like, all right, we can do this too.
Oh, that's nice.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's super nice.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, this really unspaghetti-fies it, which is fantastic.
This is one of my favorites at the moment.
Yeah, this is awesome.
And then you can use it.
Yeah.
I have one that I created for Jinja card, Jinja partials,
and also a chameleon one.
So since I wasn't using for that course example,
this is actually chameleon.
So I use the chameleon partials.
But something like this is required.
you know, Carlton does great work, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, known for it.
- So you're using this as part of your site?
- So not that original site,
I only heard about this later on,
but now I use it on everything.
Yeah, on all of my HTMX things, I use this.
- Right, tell the Django people, what does this do?
Like why do you need Django template partials
instead of just Django templates?
So it's just about organizing your code in a way that's a bit cleaner.
So if you think about how you would render templates from your different views, if you
had like a main page and then that page had a bunch of HTML things happening that made
calls to the back end to different views and those different views use different templates,
then even though all those templates are associated with the same page, it kind of ends up being
a bit of a mess.
You've got like a lot of different like partial templates.
Now you need a cool naming convention for that.
Like is this a page?
Is this a template?
And it gets just a little bit messy.
And you need to switch between files all the time to see what things are associated with each other.
Let's say you've got like five pages and each of them have like five different partials associated with them.
Suddenly it's a lot of files and you need to organize things somehow.
So what Django template partials does is it allows you to like say you've got like a main page file
to-do list, right? You could define a partial template for a to-do item within that same file
and it won't get rendered until you say render this thing. So you can like when you render your
template for the first time, you can just say okay, loop over the to-do items and use this partial
in place and render the things and that's great but then the other thing that you can do is that
you can like in a view you can you can choose to render a template but you can choose to render a
partial within that template as well and so let's say you've got a like a little form that says add
a new to-do list item then you'd submit that form and then the view would look for the partial
within the page that you care about and it'll render that and so it just ends up being that
like everything is tidy and together and it makes sense because like the to-do list items are only
used in this page and those items are only used in that page yeah yeah yeah one of the big challenges
that you'll quickly run into with this style this htmx partial exchange style is when you show the
the page originally, you want just the server rendered version, which includes, let's say,
your to-do items. So you need the HTML for the to-do items in the main page. But then when you
make changes to it, you need a little fragment of that same HTML to put a new to-do item in there
or to edit one or something. And if you're not careful, well, then you have multiple copies
of those laying around and somebody updates the design for one, and then it doesn't update the
the partial one that you wrote, which is a copy, it's not pretty.
So finding a way for reuse like this Django templates partials,
it's pretty required, I think, if you're going to stay sane.
It's like functions are required to write code.
It's pretty much like that, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I think so.
I think so.
Like you can get away with just using like lots of files
and you could keep things dry with lots of files,
but it gets like, it's very spaghetti
unless you put a lot of effort into organizing it
and then keeping it organized
because people will make PRs
that do like all sorts of weird things.
So yeah, it's like, it's not good to have to like monitor
that everything's organized.
It would be better if it was just done by default.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Like the default behavior is correct.
Yeah.
- Yeah, so grab a file, a library for that.
All right.
So let's talk about the before and after stack.
So before you talked about React,
but tell us all the pieces involved and then what does it look like today?
Okay, cool.
So React Redux.
So Redux was for just state management.
And then I used Redux Saga for mostly for data fetching stuff
so that I could handle like loading spinners
and I could see like the status of different requests over time
and that kind of thing.
Then I used Material UI because my front end make pretty skills
aren't the strongest.
So I wanted a component library that would just work
and that was the chosen one.
Then on the back end, it was Django.
Django REST framework is fairly well known.
Then I used a thing called Django Guardian
in because I needed object level permissions on the different model instances.
So, for example, we had this Kanban board and there were cards on this board that people
could move around and different people would have different permission to different cards.
So we had things like one learner would be working on a card and then they'd ask for
a review and then another learner should be able to review that.
But we wouldn't want to let just any learner look at their code, because then it would cause all
sorts of problems. So it's like, OK, this person has finished this project, so we can add them as
a reviewer on this card. And so we needed to be pretty particular about which of our users could
see different things. It wasn't super straightforward in that this person can see this. It was like,
this person can for these reasons. Yeah. So Django Guardian is really, really cool. And then
Postgres.
That's a cool library.
Maybe people could find a nice use for that one.
That's the one that's new to me.
Yeah, that's really nice.
And you can even do things like when you query a database and you say, fetch me all the cards.
You can do something like, fetch me all the cards that Bob can see.
And so long as it's configured well, then it can do that sort of thing, which is very, very helpful.
Wow, that's really cool.
So you don't have to go get all the cards and then, yeah.
Yeah.
Who have all these different permissions and then like construct some query
that comes up with it.
Yeah.
Very nice.
I love it.
Okay.
Yeah.
Super cool.
And that plugs into DRF as well.
So your, like your, your serializer or your view set.
So I haven't worked in it in a while, but the query that gets, gets used when
you access like a list API endpoint, you could just apply that automatically as well.
So if you, so you don't need to, yeah, you don't need to build it in that, in that case
either.
So it plugs into all of the things.
It's a little bit weird at first to get used to, and then, and then it's just fantastic.
Very cool.
Yeah.
And now I'm guessing much of the front end stuff is probably not there.
So the old application still exists, but it's not--
but it's like the HTMX-based version would just
be a drop-in replacement.
It's like go to this URL instead kind of thing.
Yeah.
Yeah, awesome.
Hold on.
Let's see.
So I guess now that it's done--
you said you used to work there, but you don't work there
is that right? Oh yeah, not anymore as of a few months ago. Right. So maybe I guess that's recent
enough to say sort of how is it going now? Right? How, how is it being used? How are people, you
know, is it still going strong as the technology? Yeah, the tech is the tech is solid. yeah,
so I hope that they're still building on it. there was some, some weird things happening at
at the organization before I left.
So yeah, I hope that everything is still going smoothly,
but I haven't been plugged in for a while.
Yeah.
Yeah, let's give maybe a quick shout out to--
gosh, let me try to grab it.
Give it a second.
I want to give a quick shout out to this video,
this other DjangoCon talk.
Gosh, why is--
I need to sign in my YouTube premium on this, Roger.
But this real-world SaaS product example from this guy in France, David Gilead.
Yeah, that one you said was a pretty good example if you need like a walkthrough case.
Yeah, so that one I didn't see it live.
I saw a video of it after the fact, but it is like the ultimate HTMX demo.
chose this guy really makes it dance.
It's quite an amazing thing to see.
So highly recommend that.
Yeah, this guy, David goes through and says,
here's our complex SaaS product.
And let me walk you through all the features.
I feel like this would be a pretty good one.
Your article as well.
And then this video, if you want to say,
make a case to your team like, hey, everyone,
could we consider doing this?
And I'm sure right off the bat, you'll get some folks say, well, no, we have to use React because it's interactive.
You interact with that part and it changes that part.
How are we going to possibly pull that off?
It's like, yeah, no, that's totally possible.
Yeah, I think the main arguments people have against it are like scale.
But that argument doesn't make super a lot of sense to me.
I think it might be complexity scale that they're concerned about.
But I think things like template partials solve a lot of that problem.
And then there's can it do the things?
And this solves that problem. And then is it really so much better for the team is the
other question. Is it just another fashion? Is it just another fad? And that's something
that's sometimes hard to get across. And I think that my article will do a good job of
explaining why it's a good idea. Because I had to explain this to non-technical stakeholders.
So I was like, okay, I'm making this crazy decision
and this is why.
And so I think I've got the argument down.
Go read that article if you need to convince someone.
Yeah.
But I think the other thing to mention
is the full stack that I moved to in the end.
Yeah, so HTMX we spoke about,
Django we spoke about, and Alpine we spoke about.
Now, if you are running a React front end or whatever,
you would test the front end.
in a React-y way, like you would use tools that are appropriate for that.
And so you need to think about different ways to test things.
And unit tests--
Would that be like Selenium or something?
Or what are we talking?
So I like Playwright quite a lot.
So you could do it with Selenium.
But that would be like--
it would include some pain.
Playwright is very, very lovely to work with.
So it's like Selenium only with all sorts of useful test goodies
So you can get it to take videos of your failed tests
and it's got useful flags for running your tests
on different browsers and you can keep a trace of things.
It's got interesting debugging stuff built in
and you can just run it with pytest.
So yeah, Playwright is a big part of it as well.
Yeah, Playwright is really nice.
You know, one thing that just occurred to me around the testing, if you've got a rich JavaScript front end sort of thing, you have to use something like Playwright or Selenium where it does a full browser request render of the page to interact with it.
Right.
Yeah.
And you can also do that with HTMX.
But a lot of these web frameworks, you can just in your web test code, you can say, create like a testing instance of my server.
Right.
and then make it do this request and then see what the response came back without nearly the
same overhead. And because this stuff all happens on the server, I guess you could just write a
unit test, like a web test against a fragment response, right?
Yeah. Yeah, you can. So you can, you can write, little unit tests that check different things
like that. But since a lot of the interactivity is defined within the HTML tags, your unit tests
won't they won't be able to cover like yeah so you fix this and that happens and so that's where
that's where something like playwright will come in yeah you'll still need that to but maybe less
playwright is needed oh yeah otherwise is what i was thinking yeah yeah definitely definitely i think
one of the anti-patterns i've seen is um too much playwright where they're just like why don't
use playwright for everything and then your tests are ridiculously slow and it's like you could have
just you need to test the view there's this function that you wanted to test
Exactly.
You're not Shakespeare.
You don't need that much Playwright.
Come on, get focused.
Yeah.
Playwright is a call.
I definitely recommend it.
Yeah.
And it plugs into Django really smoothly as well.
So you don't actually, the Playwright, it spins up a browser and points it at a running instance
of an application in order to test the things.
But with Django and pytest, you can use a fixture to spin up a test version of your application.
It's kind of like run servers running there in your tests anyway.
So, yeah, it integrates very, very smoothly.
Yeah, makes it very convenient.
Yeah, absolutely.
You know, one of the things you wrote a lot about, and you mentioned this, but you kind of flew past it a little bit,
was you said, am I crazy for optimizing for junior developers, right?
On the other hand, optimizing for simplicity, even if you're an expert, right?
Just because you can do all the steps and all the complexity doesn't mean you should constantly be doing those steps, right?
And so I think there's a case for optimizing for simplicity here.
What do you think?
I completely agree.
I mean, if you can just, like, take the cognitive load of developing your app
and then make it, like, simple so you can focus on actually solving problems
instead of, like, wiring, I suppose.
And life gets a lot easier.
So, yeah, simplicity rocks.
It's fast to develop, but things like HTMX make your code way, way smaller than it would otherwise be.
So it's not just simple.
It's not just that it's less convoluted.
There's also less of it.
And so there's less to test.
There's less stuff that can cause bugs.
And most of the front-end interactivity is handled by another library that's really well tested.
And you're just doing these tiny little things that are easy to reason about.
And so it's robust.
and clean um yeah so yeah i do think it's worth optimizing for simplicity i mean it made it made
everybody more productive the juniors and me as well so top notch yeah yeah i i'm constantly in
pursuit of yeah i'm trying to keep things uh simple you know if you go over to the htmx site
i don't know if you've looked at this section but they've got a you know kirsten has this essay
section, which, you know, it's not quite a blog, but it's kind of a blog. You know, it's not in
order, it's in sort of category. Whatever. And these are all nice. One thing that's nice is he
has a, on the other hand, here's a couple of examples why people didn't pick it, right? But
he's got a whole section on complexity, very, very bad. But if you keep going, there's a bunch of
The memes are so good, aren't they?
They are fantastic.
And one of these super definitely applies.
There's one that says HTML plus a backend.
It's got this bell curve.
For the beginners, like, oh, this is what I want.
As you get a little bit better, you're like, oh, I need all this complexity and all these layers.
And then sort of the Jedi Knight at the end is, yeah, HTML in the backend.
Going through this path.
I think these two ends,
I don't necessarily want to characterize beginners
to look like this character in this meme,
but, you know, I think the meme still speaks of it somewhat, right?
Yeah, yeah, definitely, definitely.
Yeah, I think it's about, like, when I teach people to code,
when I teach people, like, the very basics of code,
and, like, something I see with very junior developers
is they try to show off and be like,
look how fancy I can make my code.
I can do all of these complicated things.
And then you get them to think more like Jedi's
and say like, don't waste any moves.
Like how you wouldn't be flailing about
like this is kind of like flailing.
HTML, HTMX does that for you.
It just lets you like move directly towards your goal
instead of having to like move around it.
Yeah.
- Yeah, it's pretty glorious.
- So I know that you do a lot of teaching.
Maybe you said you work for this local company
that you did the Kanban board app for and so on.
And now what are you up to?
- So still teaching, just differently.
So yeah, it was really cool working there.
I was there for a long time, like five years in total,
which is really long.
And it was super successful.
So like since 2020, basically everybody who passed our courses ended up getting good jobs,
like very, very close to 100% of the people who passed.
And the people who didn't pass is like actually kind of small, like 7%.
And there's lots of reasons for that.
But yeah, I learned a ton from being there.
Was that a person?
That was a person pre-COVID, right?
Yeah, so post-COVID, we actually got way, way better because we had better monitoring of
individuals and we could do things like track people's cards on their board moving around.
And then from that, you can say like, oh, this piece of content is dodgy. Like it would give us
as educators a lot of feedback about what we were doing. Because if a person was stuck and you're
like, I explained this thing great. And then they're still stuck. You're like, I didn't explain this
this thing great. And so, like, the way that the teaching mechanism was built was, like, really good
for the students. But, like, if we as educators did not do a good job on something, we would know
about it and we would have to fix it. And I think that honed the craft quite a lot. So, I learned a
bunch there. Now what I am doing is I want to spread those skills in different ways. So, there is a
whole lot to what I am doing. One thing I want to do is help educators themselves. So, I have
got this thing called the Guild of Educators, because I always wanted to Guild, and it has
got a whole lot of people in there who are, like, it is a free community, come and join.
It is a bunch of education nerds who talk about education with each other. It is a support
structure, because I think educators need support structures, and it is a place to share
share learnings and share resources and opportunities and things like that.
So it's still very new, but that's one part of it.
I want to offer teacher training and things like that.
Just like we have junior developers,
people got to start somewhere with teaching and teaching online is different,
all that, yeah?
Yeah, yeah.
And it's hard because there aren't really good resources for tech educators.
Like if you dig into the literature on how learning works and how teaching works, it's like it's all either very academic.
And so it's a little bit hard to pass.
And it's not like it's just not packaged well for the people who need it or it's packaged in the wrong way.
So I came across a code school recently who I was like, how do you handle your teacher training?
And they're like, we outsource it to these guys.
And they showed me this other organization that does teacher training.
And it's like I dug through their courses and one of their selling points was like our teacher training courses are so versatile that they can be used for florists and personal trainers.
I was like, yeah, maybe not appropriate for what we're up to here.
But that's what people are relying on.
That's like the best that the industry has to offer.
So I think there's a big hole in the education space.
and I want to work to fill that. So that is part of what I am doing, and the other part
is offering technical training. And this is partially because you have got to practice
the craft, partially because I want to create opportunities for educators to get good, partially
because I really like teaching this stuff. So there are all different reasons why I am
So right now I'm building out a bunch of small workshops that cover different skills and are fairly standalone.
And those are Lego blocks that will combine into something much bigger in the future.
But for now, the first workshop that I have on offer is all about Django and HTMX.
Oh, yeah. Okay.
Yeah. So it's pretty exciting.
So it talks about the stack that we just spoke about.
We didn't mention Tailwind, but Tailwind is great as well.
It means that I can make front ends that look reasonable.
That's right.
You said you had used Material UI previously to make it great.
And Tailwind is what used in the new version?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Excellent.
Yeah, I'm really enjoying Tailwind.
Yeah, so the idea with this little workshop,
I ran it as part of DjangoCon US recently.
It was super cool.
I got, I don't know, there were way too many people there
which was great.
That's a good problem.
It's a very good problem.
It's a good problem to solve.
It's like, whoa, all of you.
So that was super cool and went really well.
The basic idea is that I want to show how to build a CRUD application
using the stack of tools in a way that sets people up
to be able to build their own stuff.
And part of the workshop is, in fact, taking these tools
and building your own thing.
And so for people who are kind of early on their career,
in their career, they can get some,
like the starts of decent portfolio projects out of it.
People built all sorts of interesting things.
So like the one person built their own personal learner management system
for like their own learning, which was really lovely.
Somebody built a music store.
Somebody else built a, what was it?
Like a chore manager for their family so that they don't fight so much.
It was great.
interesting yeah yeah and always django htmx and alpinejs um and the others and the other thing
that's cool about this is it's it's a crud application like i'm teaching people the the
bits and pieces that's the older crud app and like most of the internet is crowd applications because
it's um for the audience like if anybody hasn't heard of crud it's create read update delete like
that's most of what you need to do on the internet and so if you get the patterns down
for like a simple crud app, then you can do some pretty hardcore things with it.
So yeah, this is, so it's covering that. The workshop is small, so it's like I'm keeping things
very, very small intentionally, because I believe in the power of teachers, and I want to make sure
that everybody gets attention and gets the support that they need. And also because of the people who
tend to come to these kinds of things have different backgrounds. So some people need help
here some people need help there and so you need to keep like a good ratio of teachers to students
so yeah expert led high support small group um all of that good stuff that's very cool i'll link to
this workshop from in the show notes people want to check it out and it's out of time but
uh it's remote so people can attend from wherever right you don't have to be yeah yeah near you
Yeah, so you do not need to be in South Africa. In fact, I made it in U.S. Eastern time because,
strangely enough, most of the people who read my blog are in the U.S.
So it is U.S. and South Africa, and it shifts and changes around. But part of the reason I am
marketing it to the U.S. is because I want to be able to fund training Africans. And like there
there just isn't as much money on the side of the world.
So yeah,
I want to be able to make doing good in the tech education space into
something that's financially sustainable.
So that's why the U S and that is why it's,
it's priced in dollars.
Yeah.
So you guys can have a discount code talk Python,
talk underscore Python.
I think that was.
Yeah.
I'll put it in show notes.
People can find it there.
Awesome.
So you'll get 10% off. And then I also want to give like another 10% to something. So Foxly wanted
me to give 10% from their discount code to the DSF. So that's another code that's out there. So
that's fantastic. I've definitely benefited a lot from the DSF. So that's really, really cool. So
since this is your podcast, should the further 10% go to the DSF or the PSF or the Django
Africa event.
Oh my goodness.
I vote DjangoCon Africa.
Fantastic.
I was hoping that you'd say that.
I love DjangoCon Africa.
It's so freaking cool.
Speaking of conference and talks and stuff,
Kim out in the audience says,
in a few weeks, a really good talk
Sina gave at South
Africa PyCon.
A few weeks ago, it should be
online. Power to the people who teach
the people to code.
Yes, that's the longest title I've had for a talk ever. Thanks, Kim. Yeah, so I did that
talk at PyCon South Africa, and I also did it, I did a longer version of it at DjangoCon
US as a keynote. So I was super, super happy that I got that opportunity. It was so cool.
But yeah, it just talks about kind of how I think about teaching and how I, so it's how
think about teaching and the mechanisms that we set up. So, like, how does mastery-based learning
work, and how do you actually get, how do you engineer an education system so that it sets
people up for success and not like either frustration or boredom. Like, because there is a lot of things
that are weird about the traditional systems. Yeah, so it talks about that, but then it also shares
a bunch of lessons for individual educators on the ground. So that thing that I was talking about
earlier about how we as educators in the system were getting like a ton of feedback about our own,
the quality of our work, that gave us space to figure out a lot of like hard-hitting things. So
it's kind of the 80/20 of what teachers or would-be teachers should focus on. And I think it's
it's powerful because a lot of like everybody teaches. I mean, you teach, people teach
new team members. Like there's a lot of volunteer teachers as well. which, which is great.
I mean, there's stuff. I think doing this kind of, these presentations, this, this kind of
teaching is a super cheat code for leveling up your own skills. Yeah, definitely. There's this
thing called protege effect, which is a well-studied thing. So when people say teaching
is a great way to learn. They are not just being squishy, like it is legit, it is really, really
legit, and there are a lot of mechanisms behind it. It is like one of the simple ones is that
teaching is spaced repetition and recall, and that helps you remember your stuff.
Yeah.
Another one is like people will ask you weird questions that you would not expect,
and so you look at your own knowledge from a different direction, and you build better mental
frameworks or more robust mental frameworks. Like some people are good at building mental frameworks
and some people aren't as good. And a good way to like get a person to build good mental frameworks
is to ask them weird like left side questions about the stuff they know and get them to look
at things from different angles. So you get that from the people you're teaching. It's,
yeah, it's really, it's a beautiful thing. Yeah, it really is. It definitely rounds out
out your knowledge and makes you think deeply about some of these ideas that you just maybe
glossed over.
Yeah.
Well, I think this is probably a good place to leave it.
I want to give out one more resource real quick for people.
It is just awesome HTMX over on GitHub.
I don't know if you've poked around this, but it's got many, many examples of tools and
libraries for HTML in Python, but also in a ton of other languages.
So, like, apparently there's a Flask HTML tailwind one and one for sockets.
So maybe HTML over WebSockets.
I don't know.
These are all look pretty cool.
So people can check them out.
But yeah.
Yeah.
Fantastic.
And I definitely want to recommend people check out your essay.
And, yeah, they could take these ideas and run with them.
Yeah.
Cool.
Well, Gina, thanks for being on the show.
It's been great to talk to you.
Yeah, it's been great to talk to you, too.
This was a lot of fun.
It was.
Bye, all.
Cheers.